---
title: Machine Washed (Earnings) Spin
---
Growing companies have tons of problems to solve. So they hire a lot as they grow. At some point, these problems go away. What you get are employees who are probably doing little. And also most likely executives who delude themselves that the problems they oversaw have reincarnated into bigger ones.

The funny thing about this is that we see this play out in teams and roles.

An exec flex is how big the teams they manage are. I mean, if the stick is that the number of big problems you’re in charge of are the number of people, then guess what? You want more people underneath your box in the org chart.

This could partially explain why some organizations have titles that hardly describe the job to be done. But prefixes - such as - Sr. / Associate / Head - that organize the troops and dangle dropping or adding them as a part of promotion.

Join these two things and it’s the bureacracy-olympics where you compete in hiring budget wars and the hardware is more people! But the thing you are building is an inability to execute.

Jack Dorsey - the brilliant product CEO behind Twitter, Square, and CashApp - recently [announced on X / Twitter](https://x.com/jack/status/1742000718649319676) that he was cutting 40% of Block’s headcount. From 10,000 to 4,000. The announcement set off a series of people talking about AI replacing all sorts of jobs ( as was mentioned by Jack ). But also missed the point that ramping up employees 3X during Covid was a necessity. And in line with the observable dynamic that we talk about.

Now the part that everyone is talking about is the part where Jack mentions the use of intelligence tools ( good spin on not saying AI ). But people have been dwelling on this and missing the situation at play.

>
> but something has changed. we're already seeing that the intelligence tools we’re creating and using, paired with smaller and flatter teams, are enabling a new way of working which fundamentally changes what it means to build and run a company. and that's accelerating rapidly.
>
Recall how we end up playing bureacracy-olympics, and then you start to see that the sentence in bold above can be inverted to call out bloated companies as being capable of truly using AI / machine intelligence.

The inverted version would say “flatter teams, paired with [proprietary] intelligence tools, are enabling a new way of working”.

What this reminds me of is why about 70% of digital transformations fail. The reason for these occupations have been as much about warring political power within organizations than real outcomes.

But more importantly it is instructive that the inverted sentence is the place you want to start from. Because if you decide to cut 40% of your company — who are you going to cut? Who makes these decisions? Who stays if not the most political animals within us?

The main problem is that even modest differences in abilities, when powered with amplifiers such as intelligence technology, will produce massive differences in outcomes.

So it’s not even AI that’s really eating your lunch. But better composed teams working for or with organizationally innovative companies.